Hãy coi chừng! Hổ đang ở đây!

Tác giả: Sejal Mehta

Người minh họa: Rohan Chakravarty

Là một con hổ thật không dễ dàng chút nào

Đúng vậy, hổ rất đẹp

But tigers are also big and heavy.

 This makes it difficult for them to hunt for food.

Out of every twenty times a tiger hunts,

 it eats only once.

When a tiger moves through the forest,

 KHAU! KHAU! KHAK!

 The langur calls, just like an old man coughing!

 KHAU! KHAU! KHAK!

AWOOOO! HAWOOOO!

 The barking deer calls, like a scared dog!

 AWOOOO! HAWOOOO!

OOW! OOW! OOW!

 The spotted deer calls, like a little bird!

 OOW! OOW! OOW!

The whole forest knows the tiger is here!

 AHUUUN? AHUUUN?

 The tiger wonders, where has everyone gone?

This book was made possible by Pratham Books' StoryWeaver platform. Content under Creative Commons licenses can be downloaded, translated and can even be used to create new stories ­ provided you give appropriate credit, and indicate if changes were made. To know more about this, and the full terms of use and attribution, please visit the following link .

 Story Attribution:

This story:Watch Out! The Tiger is Here!is written bySejal Mehta. © Pratham Books , 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.

 Other Credits:

'Watch Out! The Tiger is Here!' has been published on StoryWeaver by Pratham Books. www.prathambooks.org

 Images Attributions:

Cover page:Wild animals looking at tiger, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Page 2:Tiger looking at its reflection, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Page 3:Tiger Looking at Hare, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Page 4:Tiger with Dead Deer, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Page 5:Langur Sounding Its Alarm Call, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Page 6:Barking Deer Sounding An Alarm Call, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Page 7:Spotted Deer Sounding an Alarm Call, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Page 8:Tiger Alone in the Forest, byRohan Chakravarty© Pratham Books, 2017. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.Disclaimer:https://www.storyweaver.org.in/terms_and_conditions

Some rights reserved. This book is CC­-BY­-4.0 licensed. You can copy, modify, distribute and perform the work, even for commercial purposes, all without asking permission. For full terms of use and attribution, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

This book was made possible by Pratham Books' StoryWeaver platform. Content under Creative Commons licenses can be downloaded, translated and can even be used to create new stories ­ provided you give appropriate credit, and indicate if changes were made. To know more about this, and the full terms of use and attribution, please visit the following link:

Images Attributions:

Disclaimer:https://www.storyweaver.org.in/terms_and_conditions

Some rights reserved. This book is CC­-BY­-4.0 licensed. You can copy, modify, distribute and perform the work, even for commercial purposes, all without asking permission. For full terms of use and attribution, visit: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Watch Out! The Tiger is Here! (English)

 When a tiger moves through the forest, all the animals and birds know! Listen to the different alarm calls that warn everyone in the forest that the tiger is here.

 This is a Level 1 book for children who are eager to begin reading.

Pratham Books goes digital to weave a whole new chapter in the realm of multilingual children's stories, knitting together children, authors, illustrators and publishers, folding in teachers and translators, to create a rich fabric of openly licensed multilingual stories for the children of India ­­and the world. Our unique online platform, StoryWeaver, is a playground where children, parents, teachers and librarians can get creative. Come, start weaving today, and help us get a book in every child's hand!