I Love My Mom

 Author: Fongsamay Phommaxay

 Illustrator: Nivong Sengsakoun

 Translator: Stephanie Wei

This book was made possible by Pratham Books' StoryWeaver platform. Content under Creative Commons licenses can be downloaded, translated and can even be used to create new stories provided you give appropriate credit, and indicate if changes were made. To know more about this, and the full terms of use and attribution, please visit the following link.

Story Attribution:

This story: 'I Love My Mom' is translated by Stephanie Wei. The © for this translation lies with Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Based on Original story: 'ຂ້ອຍຮັກແມ່ຂອງຂ້ອຍ', byFongsamay Phommaxay. © Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license.

Other Credits:

This story 'I Love My Mom' has been published on StoryWeaver by Room to Read.

Images Attributions:

Cover page: Woman and a girl in embrace, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 2: Woman and a girl walking together, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 3: Woman and a girl cook together, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 4: Woman and a girl water the plants, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 5: Woman and a girl wash clothes together, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 6: Woman and a girl dry some clothes, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 7: Woman helps a girl ride a bike, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 8: Girl rides a bike happily, a woman looks on, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Page 9: Woman and a girl prepare to go to bed, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license .Page 10: Woman and a girl enjoy a book together, by Nivong Sengsakoun© Room to Read, 2016. Some rights reserved. Released under CC BY 4.0 license. Disclaimer: https://www.storyweaver.org.in/terms_and_conditions

Some rights reserved. This book is CC­-BY­-4.0 licensed. You can copy, modify, distribute and perform the work, even for commercial purposes, all without asking permission. For full terms of use and attribution, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

I Love My Mom (English)

The girl in this story learns from her mother every day. Now she knows many things. Which of these can YOU do?

This is a Level 1 book for children who are eager to begin reading.

Pratham Books goes digital to weave a whole new chapter in the realm of multilingual children's stories. Knitting together children, authors, illustrators and publishers. Folding in teachers, and translators. To create a rich fabric of openly licensed multilingual stories for the children of India­­ and the world. Our unique online platform, StoryWeaver, is a playground where children, parents, teachers and librarians can get creative. Come, start weaving today, and help us get a book in every child's hand!